## Concept: Sample Sort

Sample sort is a parallel version of quicksort.

It works as follows:

Input:

 - An array of N items
 - An integer P for number of processes to use.

Result:

 - The input array has been sorted.

Steps:

 - Sample
   * Randomly select 3\*(P-1) items from the array.
   * Sort those items.
   * Take the median of each group of three in the sorted array,
     producing an array (samples) of (P-1) items.
   * Add 0 at the start and +inf at the end (or the min and max values of the type
     being sorted) of the samples array so it has (P+1) items numbered (0 to P).
 - Partition
   * Spawn P processes, numbered p in (0 to P-1).
   * Each process builds a local array of items to be sorted by scanning the
     full input and taking items between samples[p] and samples[p+1].
   * Write the number of items (n) taken to a shared array sizes at slot p.
 - Sort locally
   * Each process uses quicksort to sort the local array.
 - Copy local arrays to input.
   * Each process calculates where to put its result array as follows:
     - start = sum(sizes[0 to p - 1])    # that's sum(zero items) = 0 for p = 0
     - end   = sum(sizes[0 to p])        # that's sum(1 item) for p = 0
   * Warning: Data race if you don't synchronize here.
   * Each process copies its sorted array to input[start..end]
 - Cleanup
   * Terminate the P subprocesses. Array has been sorted "in place".

## Homework Tasks

### Task 1: Write a Program

 * Your program, ssort, should take two arguments:
   - An integer specifying the number of processes to sort with
   - The file to sort
 * The input file is structured as follows:
   - First 8 bytes: long size - number of floats in the file
   - Next 4*size bytes: An array of floats
 * Use mmap for I/O on the file to be sorted.
 * Use mmap to share data between processes.
 * Use sample sort to sort the input file, in place.

In addition, each subprocess should print out some text, showing that
it's actually participating in sample sort:

```
 {p}: start {start}, count {length of local array}
```

Example session:

```
$ ./tools/gen-input 20 data.dat
$ ./ssort 4 data.dat
0: start 0.0000, count 3
1: start 7.5690, count 5
2: start 27.1280, count 11
3: start 95.5110, count 1
$ ./tools/check-sorted data.dat
$
```

### Task 2: Measure Parallel Speedup

Test your sample sort program in six scenarios, each with a newly generated
input file of 50 million floats (or enough to take over 10 seconds for 1 process
on your machine):

 - Your local machine, 1 process
 - Your local machine, 4 processes
 - Your local machine, 8 processes

Time these tests using the "/usr/bin/time -p" command. (You're
interested in "real" time)

Repeat each test three times, taking the median.


### Task 4: report.txt

Create a file, report.txt, containing the following information:

 - The operating system, processor model, number of processor cores, and amount
   of RAM for your local machine.
 - The operating system, processor model, number of processor cores, and amount
   of RAM for the CCIS server.
 - A table of measured time and parallel speedup for each test (use ASCII art).
 - Parallel speedup is calculated as (time for 1 process / time for N processes)
 - Optimal parallel speedup is N.
 - A paragraph or two discussing what results you got and why you got them.
 - Look up "Amdahl's Law" and "Gustafson's Law" on Wikipedia. Is sample sort a good
   parallel sorting algorithm?


## To Submit

 - A .tar.gz archive with exactly one top level directory containing:
 - Your source code, including a Makefile that builds the ssort binary.
 - Either the tools directory, source and Makefile only, unmodified, or no tools
   directory.
 - A report.txt (which should be plain Unix text, line wrapped to 70 columns)
 - No binaries, object files, or input/output data files.

